# Word Recognition Factors and Lexical Stress in Consonant Distribution: A Summary of the Paper by D.P. VAN SOEREN[^1]

The corpus for this study was compiled from dictionaries of the English, Spanish, and Dutch languages. It consists of words with strict syllable structures (CVCVCV for Spanish, CVCVC for English and Dutch) in order to avoid consonant clusters, which are not a subject of this study. The stress is either on the first or second syllable.

There is previous research indicating that the beginning of words carries a higher communicative load and that some constants are easier to articulate than others. For example, it has been found that labial consonants are favored in word-initial position in several languages. Meanwhile, it is well-known that coronal sounds are more frequent cross-linguistically than sounds made with other articulators, a favoritism that is even stronger in word-final position. Other studies have also found that coronals and labials are easier to distinguish visually.

The authors of the current study use these findings in their hypothesis, suggesting that more salient constants, such as labials, are preferred when the communicative load is high, while constants with easier coarticulation, such as coronals, are preferred when the communicative load is low. They argue that as a word is pronounced, more and more potential candidates are ruled out, so the beginning of the word carries a greater burden of conveying meaning than the end, which is more predictable.

The hypothesis proposed by the authors is that when the communicative load is high, labial constants will be preferred, and the proportion of labial constants will be ranked first, second, third. If coronals turn out to be preferred instead, the expectation of the ranking order would be reversed to third, second, first. The results of the study seem to support this hypothesis, as labials are preferred when the communicative load is high. However, the findings for coronals are more complex, with unrestricted coronals showing an increase in use from first to third position, with the third position being favored only for unrestricted coronals.

The results of the study suggest that lexical stress aids with word recognition in Spanish, English, and Dutch. However, the authors recommend further research, as it could be argued that English and Dutch are too similar to suggest a cross-linguistic pattern. They specifically suggest that further research be conducted on language families other than Romance or Germanic.

[^1]: VAN SOEREN, D. (2022). The Role of Word Recognition Factors and Lexical Stress in the Distribution of Consonants in Spanish, English and Dutch. _Journal of Linguistics,_ 1-29. doi:10.1017/S0022226722000081